                                          Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

                                                      ScienceDirect
                                               Procedia Engineering 186 (2017) 349 РђЊ 356



              XVIII International Conference on Water Distribution Systems Analysis, WDSA2016

                              A System for Optimal Design of Pressure
                             Constrained Branched Piped Water Networks
                                                         N. Hoodaa, O. Damanib*
                                                  a, b
                                                       Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                                                 Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India




     Abstract

     Rural water networks in the developing world are typically branched networks with a single water source. The main design decision
     to be made for such networks is the choice of pipe diameters from a discrete set of commercially available pipe diameters. Larger
     the pipe diameters, better the service (pressure), but higher is the capital cost. In general, each link (connection between two nodes)
     in the network can consist of several pipe segments of differing diameters. For such networks, existing design tools solve the
     constrained-optimization problem heuristically [1] [2]. In [3], an ILP formulation is proposed for the special case of one pipe
     diameter per link. This means that currently one can either get an optimal solution for the special case of one piped segment per
     link or get a non-optimal solution for the general case of multiple pipe segments per link. In this work, we come up with a model
     that solves the general formulation while still maintaining optimality. Our model has an LP formulation. It not only manages to
     optimally solve the general case, it also has a runtime performance that is better than both the heuristic approach to the general
     problem as well as the optimal approach to the specific problem (one pipe per link). To aid the designers of piped water networks,
     we have developed an optimization system called JalTantra that implements this model. It also has GIS functionality integrated for
     ease of providing network details. It is publicly available at http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/jaltantra/ .

    ┬Е┬Е2016
        2016TheTheAuthors.
                    Authors. Published
                           Published    by Elsevier
                                     by Elsevier Ltd. Ltd.
                                                      This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
     Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of the XVIII International Conference on Water Distribution
    (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
     Systems. under responsibility of the organizing committee of the XVIII International Conference on Water Distribution Systems
    Peer-review

     Keywords: Water distribution network; Network cost optimization; Linear program




       * Corresponding author. Tel.: +91-93230-03401.
         E-mail address: damani@cse.iitb.ac.in




1877-7058 ┬Е 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of the XVIII International Conference on Water Distribution Systems
doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2017.03.211
350                                     N. Hooda and O. Damani / Procedia Engineering 186 (2017) 349 РђЊ 356


      1. Introduction

          Piped water network cost optimization has been studied for more than 30 years now. Several constrained
      optimization techniques from Linear Programming [4] to Genetic Algorithms [13] have been employed to solve
      various variations of the cost optimization problem. In this work, we focus on the cost optimization of rural piped
      water networks. These networks are typically gravity fed, since reliable electricity supply is not a given. Pumps are
      deployed only at the water source and not in the rest of the distribution network. Acyclic (branched) networks are
      common since the redundancy provided by cyclic (looped) networks is an unaffordable luxury.
          One of the most important aspects in the design of these systems is the choice of pipe diameters from a discrete set
      of commercially available pipe diameters. In general, each link (connection between two nodes) can consist of several
      pipe segments of differing diameters. The larger the pipe diameters, the better the service (pressure), but the higher
      is the capital cost. The branched piped water network cost optimization problem is the selection of pipe diameters that
      minimize the system cost while providing the requisite service (pressure at demand points).
          BRANCH [1] is an optimization tool by the World Bank that attempts to minimize pipe cost for branched pipe
      networks with a single water source. Though it has limited capabilities in terms of number of pipes (at most 125), and
      does not guarantee optimal solution, it is used ([11], [14], [15]) in the developing world as the only alternatives are
      expensive commercial tools like WATERGEMS [2]. Even WATERGEMS does not guarantee optimal solution since
      it uses a genetic algorithm.
          In [3], an ILP formulation is proposed for the special case of one pipe diameter per link. This means that currently
      one can either get an optimal solution for the special case of one piped segment per link [3] or get a non-optimal
      solution for the general case of multiple pipe segments per link [1], [2]. In this work, our aim is to come up with a
      formulation that solves the general formulation while still maintaining optimality.
          For the general problem, in addition to the user provided pressure and flow related constraints, following additional
      constraint is inferred from [5]: in the optimal solution, each link consists of at most two pipe segments of adjacent
      diameters from the available diameter set. We take two approaches to the multiple pipes per link formulation. In the
      first approach, we use the fact that the optimal solution will contain at most two pipe segments per link [5]. In the
      other approach, we make no assumption on the number of pipe segments per link. Surprisingly, the latter formulationРђЎs
      runtime performance is much better than the former. But knowing the structure of the optimal solution and trying to
      capture that as a constraint led to a much worse runtime performance! The second formulation solves the problem
      optimally and efficiently. Its solution indeed only contains at most two pipe diameters for each link in the network.
      The structure that we were trying to enforce for the first formulation has come out naturally in the second.
          Using the general formulation we have implemented a water network design system called JalTantra. The system
      also has GIS integration for ease of adding network details. The overall goal for JalTantra is wide reaching and will
      attempt to solve several network design constraints like source selection, storage location/capacity, choice of pipe
      diameters, water supply scheduling, cost allocation etc. The scope of the present study is restricted to determining the
      pipe diameters in a single source acyclic (branched) network.
          The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the problem formulation. Section 3 is a brief
      description of the environment used to build the JalTantra system. Section 4 describes the comparison results of the
      different models on six different networks. Conclusions and future work directions are presented in Section 5.

      Nomenclature

      O(.)     The total pipe cost which is a function of the pipe diameters chosen for each link
      NL       The number of links in the network
      Di       Pipe diameter for the link i
      Li       Length of link i
      Ci       Cost per unit length of link i, a function of the pipe diameter Di
      NP       Number of commercially available pipe diameters
      xij      boolean variable, 1 if the ith link uses the jth diameter, 0 otherwise
      Pn       The minimum pressure that must be maintained at node n
      HR       The head supplied by the reference node R
                             N. Hooda and O. Damani / Procedia Engineering 186 (2017) 349 РђЊ 356                             351


En       The elevation of node n
Sn       Set of pipes that connect node n to the reference node R
HLij     Headloss in link i due to diameter j


2. Problem Formulation

2.1. Problem Definition

    The typical rural piped water network consists of a source MBR (mass balancing reservoir), demand nodes, and
pipes connecting them. If required, pumps are used to supply water from a water body to the MBR which then feeds
the remaining network by gravity. A gravity fed network has its MBR located at a higher elevation so that no pumping
is required for the downstream network. An example network is shown in Figure 1. It consists of 5 nodes and 4 links.
Node 1 is the source for the network, and nodes 2, 4 and 5 are the demand points. Node 3 is a zero demand node. Such
nodes are typically introduced at intermediate points of high elevation.




                                                   Fig. 1. Gen_5 network

    Nodes in the network have water demands and minimum pressure requirements that must be maintained. The
design process involves selecting the diameters for the pipes that must be used to supply these nodes. Lower the
diameter, lower is the cost of the pipes. But lower diameters cause higher friction losses in the pipes which may lead
to insufficient pressures at the demand nodes. Therefore the optimization goal is to minimize pipe cost under the
constraint of minimum pressure requirements at the demand nodes. The choice of diameter is to be made from a
discrete set of commercial pipe diameters that are available.
    Rural piped water networks are typically branched (acyclic) as compared to urban networks which are frequently
looped. In our present study we restrict ourselves to single source acyclic piped water networks. Since the network is
acyclic, flow in each link can be computed easily from the node demands. The pumping from source to MBR is not
considered. Instead we assume a source that is able to maintain the supply of water at the given head (head at a point
is the height to which water naturally rises. The pressure at a point is the difference between its head and elevation.).
Formally, we are solving the following optimization problem:
x Input: Source node<head>, Nodes<elevation, water demand, minimum pressure requirement>, Link<start/end
    node, length>, Commercial pipe diameter<cost per unit length, roughness>
x Output: Length and diameter of pipe segments for each link
x Objective: Minimize total pipe cost
x Constraints:
    РЌІ Pressure at each node must exceed minimum pressure specified
    РЌІ Water demand must be met at each node
    РЌІ Pipe diameters can only take values from provided commercial pipe diameters
2.2. One Pipe Per Link

   [3] has an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) formulation for the problem where only one pipe diameter is used
per link. It uses binary variables to represent the choice of commercial pipe to be made for each link. Henceforth we
use the term OnePipe model while referring to this formulation.
352                                       N. Hooda and O. Damani / Procedia Engineering 186 (2017) 349 РђЊ 356


      2.2.1. The Objective Function:
         The objective function to be minimized is the total cost of the pipes chosen for the links in the network. The
      diameters Di can only be chosen from the set of available commercial pipe diameters. This restriction is represented
      via binary variables xij. The objective function is:

                                                                    Я»ЄЯ»Ё Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                                          ▄▒рѕ║Кц рѕ╗ Яхї  ЯиЇ ЯиЇ РђФ▄«РђгЯ»ю РђФ▄ЦРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю рѕ║РђФ▄дРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю рѕ╗РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю
                                                                    Я»юЯГђЯгх Я»ЮЯГђЯгх


      2.2.2. Pipe constraint:
          For each link the objective function has terms for each of the available commercial pipe diameters. Since each link
      is to be installed with only one diameter, it means that exactly one of the binary variables corresponding to each link
      must be one. Therefore we get the following pipe constraint for each link i:

                                                                    Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                                                    ЯиЇ РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю Яхї ═│
                                                                    Я»ЮЯГђЯгх


      2.2.3. Node constraint:
         At each node a minimum amount of pressure needs to be maintained. The pressure at any node is calculated from
      the headloss in the pipes connecting the node to the reference node i.e. the source for the network. We use the Hazen-
      Williams formula for headloss. Therefore the pressure constraint for each node n is:

                                                                                  Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                                       ▄▓Я»А ЯхЉ  РђФ▄фРђгЯ»І Яхє РђФ▄ДРђгЯ»А Яхє  ЯиЇ ЯиЇ РђФ▄«▄фРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю
                                                                              Я»юРђФОљРђгЯ»їЯ│Ў Я»ЮЯГђЯгх


                                                                                 ПѓПѕРђФПЊПІРђгЯ»ю ЯгхКцЯг╝Яг╣ЯгХ
                                                              ═│═▓Кц═И═║ РђФ▄« ОЏРђгЯ»ю РђФОЏРђг
                                                                              РђФПЈПЈПЂПіПёПЃПЉПІПјРђгЯ»Ю
                                                     РђФ▄«▄фРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю Яхї
                                                                       ПђПЁ▄йПЅПЂРђФПјПЂПљРђгЯ»Ю ЯгИКцЯг╝Яг╗

      2.3. Two Pipes Per Link

          The previous formulation assumes a single pipe diameter for each link in the network. But this might not be (and
      usually isnРђЎt) the optimal solution. In the most general case, we could have several pipes of varying diameters for a
      single link in the network. In [5] it is shown that in the optimal solution each link will consist of at most two pipe
      segments of adjacent diameters. The above will hold if the commercial pipe cost is a convex function of a power of
      its diameter, which is the case in practice. To incorporate this knowledge about optimal solution structure we modify
      the objective function, as given next.

      2.3.1. The Objective Function:
         To generalize the formulation in order to account for multiple pipes per link we introduce two new continuous
      variables for each link: li1 and li2. The previous boolean variable representing the choice of commercial pipe for each
      link is now broken into two: xij1 and xij2. Here li1/ li2 represent the length of the two pipes for link i and xij1/ xij2 represent
      the choice of diameters for the two pipes. The modified objective function is:

                                                       Я»ЄЯ»Ё Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                             ▄▒рѕ║Кц рѕ╗ Яхї  ЯиЇ ЯиЇ РђФ▄ЦРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхФРђФ▄дРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх Ях»ПѕЯ»юЯгх РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхЁ РђФ▄ЦРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ рѕ║РђФ▄дРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ рѕ╗ПѕЯ»юЯгХ РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ
                                                       Я»юЯГђЯгх Я»ЮЯГђЯгх
                              N. Hooda and O. Damani / Procedia Engineering 186 (2017) 349 РђЊ 356                                353


   This formulation is not linear since we have products like li1 * xij1 both of whose terms are variables. We linearize
this equation by introducing zij1:

                                                              РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх Яхї ПѕЯ»юЯгх РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх

   This nonlinear equality is represented by the following set of linear inequalities:

                                 РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхЉ РђФ▄«РђгЯ»ю РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ,     РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхЉ ПѕЯ»юЯгх ,           РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх Яхњ ПѕЯ»юЯгх Яхє РђФ▄«РђгЯ»ю рѕ║═│ Яхє РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх рѕ╗

   A similar set of inequalities will be introduced for z ij2 as well. This linearization is possible since z is a product of
a continuous variable and a boolean variable. Our new objective function:

                                                    Я»ЄЯ»Ё Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                        ▄▒рѕ║Кц рѕ╗ Яхї  ЯиЇ ЯиЇ РђФ▄ЦРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхФРђФ▄дРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх Ях»РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхЁ РђФ▄ЦРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ рѕ║РђФ▄дРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ рѕ╗РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ
                                                    Я»юЯГђЯгх Я»ЮЯГђЯгх


2.3.2. Pipe Constraint
   As before, the choice of pipe diameter must be made from the available commercial pipe diameters.

                                                               Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                                               ЯиЇ РђФПћРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх Яхї ═│
                                                               Я»ЮЯГђЯгх


   Similar equalities hold for xij2. We also have following additional constraint for each link i.

                                                              ПѕЯ»юЯгх ЯхЁ  ПѕЯ»юЯгХ Яхї РђФ▄«РђгЯ»ю

2.3.3. Node Constraint
   The node constraint for minimum pressure requirement now changes since length of each pipe segment is no longer
a constant. The node constraint in each link i now becomes: (possible since HLij is linear in the length of the pipe)


                                                                        Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                         ▄▓Я»А ЯхЉ  РђФ▄фРђгЯ»І Яхє РђФ▄ДРђгЯ»А Яхє  ЯиЇ ЯиЇ РђФ▄«▄фРђгнбЯ»юЯ»Ю рѕ║РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгх ЯхЁ РђФПќРђгЯ»юЯ»ЮЯгХ рѕ╗
                                                                 Я»юРђФОљРђгЯ»їЯ│Ў Я»ЮЯГђЯгх


                                                                          ПѓПѕРђФПЊПІРђгЯ»ю ЯгхКцЯг╝Яг╣ЯгХ
                                                          ═│═▓Кц═И═║ РђФОЏРђг
                                                                       РђФПЈПЈПЂПіПёПЃПЉПІПјРђгЯ»Ю
                                                РђФ▄«▄фРђгнбЯ»юЯ»Ю Яхї
                                                                     ПђПЁ▄йПЅПЂРђФПјПЂПљРђгЯ»Ю ЯгИКцЯг╝Яг╗

2.3.4. Performance
   On testing the new formulation, the runtime performance is found to be very poor. Whereas for the OnePipe model
a 100 node network can be solved in 1.5 seconds, the new formulation cannot solve optimally even a 10 node network
before getting timed out at 100 seconds.
   The reason for this is the large number of new constraints that are added to the system. Previously all constraints
were linear in the number of nodes. We had only one constraint for each link and one for each node (for an acyclic
network number of links is one less than the number of nodes). But now, in order to introduce zij1 and zij2, we have
introduced 6 new constraints for each (link, pipe diameter) combination.
354                                         N. Hooda and O. Damani / Procedia Engineering 186 (2017) 349 РђЊ 356


      2.4. Proposed Model

         In the previous formulation to introduce multiple pipes per link, we determine the lengths of the two pipes in the
      link and independently assign a commercial pipe diameter to each. This causes a blowup in the number of constraints.
         To overcome this, we ignore the two pipe segment structure and model each link as being made up of pipes for
      each possible commercial pipe diameter. All that remains is to determine the length of each component. No explicit
      choice is made as to which pipe diameter is chosen. The pipe component is chosen if it has non-zero length.
         We introduce continuous variables lij and do away with the binary choice variables xij. Each link is made up of NP
      components corresponding to the NP pipe diameters. lij then represents the length of each of these components.

      2.4.1. The Objective Function:
         We replace the terms li*xij with lij in our objective cost:

                                                                         Я»ЄЯ»Ё Я»ЄЯ»Ѕ

                                                               ▄▒рѕ║Кц рѕ╗ Яхї  ЯиЇ ЯиЇ РђФ▄ЦРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю рѕ║РђФ▄дРђгЯ»юЯ»Ю рѕ╗ПѕЯ»юЯ»Ю
                                                       