This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
                                        10.1109/JESTPE.2014.2315833, IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics




                Half and Full-Bridge Modular Multilevel Converter Models for Simulations of Full-Scale
                                      HVDC Links and Multi-terminal DC grids

                                                              G.P. Adam, IEEE Member, and B.W. Williams

          Abstract—This           paper         presents        an    improved and its anti-parallel) are proven to be inefficient for full-scale
          electromagnetic transient (EMT) simulation models for the modelling of the MMC based HVDC links as simulation times
          half and full-bridge modular multilevel converters that can become prohibitively long. Despite the above shortcomings,
          be used for full-scale simulation of multilevel high-voltage this approach remains widely used, where transient response
          dc transmission systems, with hundreds of cells per arm. of the MMC based HVDC links to ac and dc network faults
          The presented models employ minimum software overhead are studied using reduced number of cells. This is because the
          within their electromagnetic transient parts to correctly switching model is extremely useful when comes to capturing
          represent modular multilevel converters (MMC) of the MMC internal dynamics in great details during ac and
          behaviour during dc network faults when converter dc network faults. In attempt to reduce simulation time, the
          switching devices are blocked. The validity and authors in [28, 29] presented an averaged model of the MMC
          scalabilities of the presented models are demonstrated based HVDC link where the ac component of the MMC upper
          using open loop simulations of the half and full-bridge and lower arms modulation functions are obtained directly
          MMCs, and closed loop simulation of a full-scale HVDC from the inner current controller and appropriate dc offsets are
          link, with 201 cells per arm that equipped with basic added. These modulating functions are used as inputs to the
          HVDC controllers, including that for suppression of the two controlled voltage sources that mimicked the voltage
          2nd harmonic currents in the converter arms. The results developed across MMC upper and lower arms. The main
          obtained from both demonstrations have shown that the weakness of this approach is that it does not allow natural
          presented models are able to accurately simulate the development of the arm current dc component and circulating
          typical behaviour of the MMC during normal, and ac and current, thus not able to naturally developed dc power as in
          dc network faults.                                                     real world MMC. For this reason, the authors in [28,
          Key words—electromagnetic transient simulation; high- 29]included additional stage that artificially injects dc
          voltage dc transmission system; half and full-bridge components into converter arms, estimated based on power
          modular multilevel converter; and hybrid multilevel balance principle, and also this stage has been used to mimic
          converters.                                                            MMC converter operation during gate blocking as required
                                                                                 during dc network fault. Additionally, injection of the dc
                                  I.    INTRODUCTION                             components into converter arm currents as in [28, 29] results
          Increased operational flexibilities of the voltage source in instantaneous balance between MMC ac and dc powers, and
          converter based high-voltage dc (VSC-HVDC) transmission this deprives the approach presented in [28, 29] from
          system within ac power systems in the last decade have accurately reproduce the dc power dynamics due to MMC
          encouraged its universal acceptance by the power system inertia and propagation delays due to arm and dc line
          utilities worldwide[1-12]. Additionally, its evolution from that inductances (inductances in the dc current paths). Although,
          build around the two-level and neutral-point clamped the approach in [28, 29] provides an efficient way of
          converter topologies to that built using true multilevel modelling MMC based HVDC link for general system level
          converters, with low semiconductor losses and improved ac studies, it cannot reproduce MMC internal dynamics at
          side waveforms quality have accelerated its adoption in many microscopic levels as required in design stage and for
          of the recent HVDC transmission systems projects[13-19]. protection purposes during ac and dc network faults.
          Replacing of the traditional concept of voltage source Reference [30] presented an efficient method for full-scale
          converter that uses concentrated reservoir capacitors at the modelling of the MMC based HVDC link that uses
          converter dc input by that uses distributed capacitors such as electromagnetic transient approach. The authors in [30] use
          that in modular multilevel converter has improved the Dommel’s Norton and Thevenin equivalent circuits of the
          resiliency of the VSC-HVDC transmission systems to ac and MMC cell capacitors, and two-state resistor representation of
          dc network faults[20-27]. For aforementioned reasons, the switching devices to reduce the entire arm of the MMC to
          modular multilevel converter has become the preferred a simple Thevenin equivalent circuit, with two terminals. This
          technology for large-scale HVDC links and dc grids that could approach significantly reduces computation burden that arises
          ensure safe and reliable operation during ac and dc network from solution of the power circuit, while that due to
          disturbances.                                                          modulation and capacitor voltage balancing is retained as in
          Full-scale modelling of the VSC-HVDC links that use half or detail switching models. Despite above simplification, this
          full bridge cell modular converters, with hundreds of cells per approach is able to capture some of the MMC internal
          arm is computationally intensive task that requires machines dynamics that associated with the cell capacitor voltages and
          with high computing power and large memory, and takes long arm currents, and also allow natural development of the dc and
          time to simulate. The traditional switching models that use circulating current components of the MMC arms, hence, it is
          power electronic building blocks with full capabilities of able to reproduce the dynamics of the dc power. However, the
          mimicking conduction of the physical devices (such as IGBT electromagnetic transient approach as discussed in reference
                                                                                 [30] cannot reproduce dynamic interaction between ac and dc
          G.P. Adam and B.W. Williams are with the Electronic and Electrical sides during dc network fault.
          Engineering Department, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK (email: The accelerated model of the MMC presented in [31] is
          grain.adam@strath.ac.uk and barry.williams@strath.ac.uk).              developed in similar theoretical basis as that in [30], except




                                 2168-6777 (c) 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
                                         http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
                                        10.1109/JESTPE.2014.2315833, IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics




          the authors unknowingly have treated each individual MMC from both demonstrations have shown that the presented
          cell as a primitive circuit that share the same current injection MMC model is able to reproduce the typical behaviour of
          equal to the arm current, and this assumption permits MMC based HVDC links to microscopic level in all the above
          application of the generalized circuit theory by Kron [32-34] . studies. This qualifies the presented MMC model to be used
          Additionally, this allows Kron connection matrix to be for detailed studies of the MMC based HVDC links at design
          constructed using relationships between arm current and stage such as fine tuning of MMC passive parameters, and
          individual cell currents, and such connection matrix can be validation of the control and protection systems.
          used to prove that validity of the approach presented in [31].
          The accelerated MMC model in its present form has the same II.             REVIEW OF THE MODULAR MULTILEVEL CONVERTER
          attributes and limitations of that presented in [30]. Figure 1 shows three-phase generic modular multilevel
          Nevertheless, they remain the only practical ways to simulate converter with N cells per arm. For input dc link voltage ‘V ’,
                                                                                                                                           dc
          full-scale MMC based HVDC link, with hundreds of cells per                                                         V
          arm.                                                               voltage stress across each switching devices is  dc
                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                   , provided
          The authors in [35] presented two simplified MMC that the voltage across each cell capacitor is maintained at
          fundamental average models for slow dynamic studies that Vdc
          deliberately ignore converter switching actions and dynamics          N
                                                                                  [38-41]. In each instant, K and N-K cell capacitors from
          of the cell capacitors, while considering that of the ac side in the upper and lower arms must be inserted in the power path in
          order to enable the use of large time step and reduce order synthesize different output voltage levels. This ensures
          simulation time. Reference [35] has shown that this approach that va1+va2=Vdc±v; where va1 and va2 represent voltages
          is suitable for transient and small signal stability studies where across the upper and lower arms of phase ‘a’, and V
          manipulation of the converter output active and reactive represents ac plus dc voltage drop in the internal resistance
          powers are useful for improving stability of the ac parts of the (Rd) and inductance (Ld) of the arm reactors. In other words,
          power systems; but it is inappropriate for use in any studies from 2N available cell capacitors in each phase (upper and
          that concern with the dc side and fast transient. Furthermore, lower arms) of the modular converter, only N cell capacitors
          both MMC models proposed in [35] are unable to naturally must be switched into the power path while the N remaining
          developed dc current components of the arm currents; thus, cell capacitors must be bypassed. Such restriction necessitates
          unable to produce dc power naturally.                              complementary operation of the upper and lower arms of the
          The authors in [36, 37] proposed an interesting approach that modular converter[42]. Since modular converter synthesizes
          uses a factitious network known as Surrogate to model full- the amplified version of the modulating signals (sinusoidal
          scale MMC based HVDC link. This approach replaces the output voltage) by insertion of its cell capacitors into power
          actual MMC cells in each converter arm by their Surrogate path sequentially, flow of fundamental current through these
          equivalents that produce the same computational results as the capacitors plus voltage drop across arm reactors will cause the
          true cells. Surrogate network for each arm of the half or full- cell capacitor voltages to oscillate around fixed dc component.
          bridge MMC contains three sub-networks that represent The exact value of the cell capacitor voltages dc component is
          converter blocking state, sub-modules bypass state, and influenced by power flow direction, and can be determined by
          positive and negative sub-modules insertion states. This (Vdc±2RdId)/N; where Id is the arm current dc component.
          approach is appeared to be promising for large-scale Oscillation of the upper cell capacitor voltages against that of
          modelling of the multi-terminal HVDC networks where MMC the lower arm, and that of individual phase against main dc
          internal dynamics are less important. References [36, 37] have link voltage cause additional current components to flow in
          demonstrated the suitability of Surrogate network modelling the modular converter arms (inrush plus circulating currents).
          approach of the MMC for real-time simulation and hardware The inrush currents are cause by switching of the cell
          in loop, with much smaller time step than other commercially capacitor in and out of the power path for the purpose of
          available real-time digital simulators. However, its ability to maintaining capacitor voltage balancing, and oscillation of the
          accurately simulate dc fault is yet to be seen.                    upper arm against the lower arm. The circulating currents are
          This paper improves the MMC modelling approach presented caused by oscillation of individual phase arm voltages such as
          in [31] to be able to simulate the performance of full-scale va1+va2, vb1+vb2 and vc1+vc2 against the main dc link voltage
          MMC based HVDC links during ac and dc network faults, and (Vdc); where vb1 and vb2, and vc1 and vc2 are the voltage
          to capture its internal dynamics to microscopic levels (cell developed across the upper and lower arm cell capacitors of
          capacitor voltages, arm currents, current stresses in switching the phases b and c.
          devices, and dynamics of ac and dc powers). The ability to Unlike conventional voltage source converters, the upper and
          simulate dc fault is achieved by setting values of the two-state lower arms of the modular converter conduct simultaneously,
          resistors that represent the MMC switching devices to mimic and this result in each arm contributes half of the output phase
          exactly the physical operation of gate insulated bi-polar current, thus, half of the ac power per phase converter
          transistors(IGBT) and their anti-parallel diodes during gate exchanges with the ac side. The power exchange between each
          blocking, taking into account arm currents polarities. The first phase and dc side is achieved through dc power, which is
          part of this paper presents an open loop demonstrations of the related to Id (dc component of the arm current). Flow of the
          half and full-bridge MMC, including validation of the three current components in the semiconductor switches cause
          presented half-bridge MMC model against its switching modular converter to have higher on-state loss when compared
          counterpart, and scalability of the full-bridge MMC model. to traditional voltage source converters such as two-level and
          The second part of this paper presents a closed loop neutral-point clamped[43]. Since fundamental and dc
          demonstration that uses a full-scale model of the half-bridge components of the arm currents are necessary for power
          MMC based HVDC to simulate its performance during normal exchange between ac and dc sides, the inrush and circulating
          operation, and ac and dc network faults. The results obtained current component of the arm current must be minimized in



                                 2168-6777 (c) 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
                                         http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI
                                        10.1109/JESTPE.2014.2315833, IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics




          order to reduce modular multilevel converter on-state loss as signal blocking as happens during dc short circuit faults, Rxi
          discussed in [44-46]. However, active suppression of the 2nd and Rai are set based on the arm current polarity and peak of
          harmonic in the arm current, which is the dominant component line-to-line voltages. Line-to-line voltages at converter
          of the circulating current as suggested in [47-52] is associated terminals are used to mimic diode rectifier operation of the
          with additional switching losses, and also limits the maximum typical MMC when gate signals are inhibited. Arm currents
          attainable modulation index (hence, results in smaller polarities are used to mimic conduction of the anti-parallel
          converter P-Q envelope). Method that uses passive filter to diodes of the switching devices Sxi and Sai. For example,
          suppress arm current circulating in the modular converter is assume arm current Imi in Figure 2 (a) and (b) is positive, when
          proposed in [53]. This method avoids the shortcoming of the Imi<0, Rai for all cells in the upper and lower arms that expose
          previous method that actively suppresses arm circulating maximum line-to-line voltage are set on, and all remaining
          current, but its downside is that it requires additional passive switches must set to off-state (typical diode rectifier
          component, which may slightly increase converter station operation). When Imi ˃0, and Rxi for the entire arm must be on
          footprint and losses. For more details on the modulation and to mimic the gate blocking condition in typical MMC
          cell capacitor voltage balancing adopted in this paper, refer to operation when the conduction path is through anti-parallel
          [41, 42, 44, 54-60].                                             diodes of Sxi and cell capacitors. In this manner, the
                                                                           electromagnetic transient representation of the MMC cell
                                                                           mimics the exact operation of the physical half-bridge MMC
                                                                           cell operation in all operating modes.
                                                                      